.TH cfengine 8 "Maintenance Commands" HiOslo
.SH NAME
cfengine \- network configuration engine
.SH SYNOPSIS
/usr/local/sbin/cfagent [options]
.PP
/usr/local/sbin/cfrun [options] 
.PP
/usr/local/sbin/cfservd
.PP
/usr/local/sbin/cfexecd
.PP
/usr/local/sbin/cfenvd
.PP
/usr/local/sbin/cfkey
.PP
/usr/local/sbin/cfenvgraph

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cfengine
is a language based system specifically designed
for testing and configuring unix\-like systems attached to
a TCP/IP network. You can think of
.B cfengine
as a very high
level language \-\- much higher level than Perl or shell. A
single statement can result in many hundreds of links
being created, or the permissions of many hundreds of
files being set. The idea of 
.B cfenginge
is to create a
single file or set of configuration files which will
describe the setup of every host on your network.
.PP
.B cfagent
runs on every host and parses one file (or file\-set),
the configuration of the host is checked against this file
and, if desired, any deviations are fixed.
.B cfagent
reads a configuration file called cfengine.conf in
a directory pointed to by the environment variable CFINPUTS.
.B cfagent
performs host integrity and security checks as well
as installing and repairing system configuration.
.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS
.IP "-a (--sysadm)" 25
Print only the name of the system administrator then quit.
.IP "-b (--force-net-copy)"
Forces net copy even if remote server is localhost
.IP "-c (--no-check-files)"
Do not check access rights on file systems
.IP "-C (--no-check-mounts)"
Check mount points for consistency. If this option is set
then directories which lie in the \*(rqmount point\*(lq area are
checked to see whether there is anything mounted on them.
.IP "-d (--debug)"
Enable debugging output. (parsing \-d1,run, \-d2, lite \-d3)
.IP "-D (--define)"
Define a compound class symbol of the form alpha.beta.gamma.
.IP "-e (--no-edits)"
Suppress file editing.
.IP "-E (--enforce-links)"
Globally force links to be created where plain files or
links already exist. You have to use this in
interactive mode and answer a yes/no query before
.B cfagent
will run like this.
.IP "-f (--file)"
Parse filename after this switch. By default 
.B cfagent
looks for a file called cfengine.conf in the current directory.
.IP "-h (--help )"
Help information. Display version banner and options summary.
.IP "-H (--no-hard-classes)"
Prevents 
.B cfagent
from generating any internal class name
information. Can be used for emulation purposes.
.IP "-i (--no-ifconfig)"
Do not attempt to configure the local area network interface.
.IP "-I (--inform)"
Switches on the inform output level, whereby 
.B cfagent
reports everything it changes..
.IP "-k (--no-copy)"
Do not copy/image any files.
.IP "-K (--no-lock)"
Ignore locks when running.
.IP "-l (--traverse-links)"
Normally 
.B cfagent
does not follow symbolic links when recursively
parsing directories. This option will force it to do so.
.IP "-L (--delete-stale-links)"
Delete links which do not point to existing files (except in
user home directories, which are not touched).
.IP "-m (--no-mount)"
Do not attempt to mount file systems or edit the filesystem table.
.IP "-M (--no-modules)"
Ignore modules in actionsequence.
.IP "-n (--recon,--dry-run,--just-print)"
No action. Only print what has to be done without actually doing it.
.IP "-N (--negate,--undefine)"
Cancel a set of classes, or undefine (set value to false) a
compound class of the form alpha.beta.gamma.
.IP "-p (--parse-only)"
Parse file and then stop. Used for checking the syntax of a
program.
.IP "-q (--no-splay)"
Switch off host splaying (sleeping).
.IP "-s (--no-commands)"
Do not execute scripts or shell commands.
.IP "-S (--silent)"
Silence run time warnings.
.IP "-t (--no-tidy)"
Do not tidy file systems.
.IP "-u (--use-env)"
Causes 
.B cfagent
to generate an environment variable CFALLCLASSES
which can be read by child processes (scripts). This variable
contains a summary of all the currently defined classes at any
given time. This option causes some system 5 systems to generate
a Bus Error or segmentation fault.
.IP "-U (--underscore-classes)"
When this option is set, 
.B cfagent
adds an underscore to the
beginning of all hard system classes (like _sun4, _linux etc.)
This can be used to avoid naming conflicts if you are so injudicious
as to name a host by the name of a hard class. Other classes
are not affected.
.IP "-v (--verbose)"
Verbose mode. Prints detailed information about actions and state.
.IP "-V (--version)"
Print only the version string and then quit.
.IP "-x (--no-preconf)"
Do not execute the cf.preconf net configuration file.
.IP "-X (--no-links)"
Do not execute the links section of a program.
.IP "-w (--no-warn,--quiet)"
Do not print warning messages.
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Burgess, Oslo University College
.SH INFORMATION
http://www.cfengine.org

