=head1 NAME

cfetool import - import the contents of a database from XML format

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cfetool> B<import> I<name>
S<B<--file>|B<-f> I<filename>>
S<[B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>]>
S<[B<--daily>|B<-d>]>
S<[B<--weekly>|B<-w>]>
S<[B<--yearly>|B<-y>]>
S<[B<--verbose>|B<-v>]>
S<[B<--debug>|B<-D>]>
S<[B<--debugging>|B<-E>]>
S<[B<--debugging2>|B<-Y>]>
S<[B<--help>|B<-h>]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Creates a new database from it's XML representation, in the format created by
B<rrdtool dump>.

The B<-d>, B<-w>, and B<-y> options specify which databases to create and look
for in the dump, and may be combined. If they are all ommitted, the default is
to only import the weekly database.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--file>|B<-f> I<filename>

Specifies the XML file to restore.

=item B<--path>|B<-p>

The directory in which to create the new database folder. If this argument is
not provided, the current working directory will be used.

=item B<--daily>|B<-d>

Create a database for recording daily patterns.

=item B<--weekly>|B<-w>

Create a database for recording weekly patterns.

=item B<--yearly>|B<-y>

Create a database for recording yearly patterns.

=item B<--verbose>|B<-v>

Print details of the command's execution to the standard output stream.

=item B<--debug>|B<-D>

Print even more details of the command's execution to the standard output
stream.

=item B<--debugging>|B<-E>

More debugging output.

=item B<--debugging2>|B<-Y>

Even more debugging output.

=item B<--help>|B<-h>

Print a short help message and then exit.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

  % cfetool import temperature_copy --path /my/path --file ./temperature.xml

Create a new weekly database, C<temperature_copy>, in the C</my/path>
directory, and import it's contents from the file C<temperature.xml> in the
current working directory.

=head1 AUTHORS

The code and documentation were contributed by Stanford Linear Accelerator
Center, a department of Stanford University.
This documentation was written by

=over

=item Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net> and

=item Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu>

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER

 Copyright 2004 Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu> and
                Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net>
 All rights reserved.
