=head1 NAME

cfetool dump - dump the contents of a database in XML format

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cfetool> B<dump> I<name>
S<[B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>]>
S<[B<--file>|B<-f> I<filename>]>
S<[B<--daily>|B<-d>]>
S<[B<--weekly>|B<-w>]>
S<[B<--yearly>|B<-y>]>
S<[B<--verbose>|B<-v>]>
S<[B<--debug>|B<-D>]>
S<[B<--debugging>|B<-E>]>
S<[B<--debugging2>|B<-Y>]>
S<[B<--help>|B<-h>]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Prints the contents of the specified database in XML format, with comments
for human readability. This format can be read by B<cfetool import>.

The B<-d>, B<-w>, and B<-y> options specify which databases to include in the
dump, and may be combined. If they are all ommitted, the default is to only
dump the weekly database.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>

Names the directory in which the database specified by I<name> can be found.

=item B<--file>|B<-f> I<filename>

Names a file to print the XML to. If this option is omitted, the XML will be
printed to the standard output stream.

=item B<--daily>|B<-d>

Include the daily pattern database in the dump.

=item B<--weekly>|B<-w>

Include the weekly pattern database in the dump.

=item B<--yearly>|B<-y>

Include the yearly pattern database in the dump.

=item B<--verbose>|B<-v>

Print details of the command's execution to the standard output stream.
When using this argument, it is recommended that you also provide the B<-f>
argument, to avoid sharing the standard output stream.

=item B<--debug>|B<-D>

Print even more details of the command's execution to the standard output
stream.

=item B<--debugging>|B<-E>

More debugging output.

=item B<--debugging2>|B<-Y>

Even more debugging output.

=item B<--help>|B<-h>

Print a short help message and then exit.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

  % cfetool dump temperature --path /my/path -f temperature.xml

Prints the following to the file B<temperature.xml>:

 <!-- cfetool Database Dump -->
 <dump>

 	<name> temperature </name>

 	<age> 1 </age> <!-- steps (0.001 weeks) -->

 	<step> 10 </step> <!-- minutes -->

 	<!-- consecutive updates -->
 	<iterations> 1 </iterations>

 	<!-- last update at Tue Aug 31 10:32:05 2004 -->
 	<timestamp> 1093973525 </timestamp>

 	<!-- current weighted average -->
 	<expect> 7.105000 </expect>

 	<!-- current variance -->
 	<var> 38.280217 </var>


 <!-- data entries -->
 	<entry> <timekey> Tue:Hr10:Min30_40 </timekey>
 		<expect> 10.150000 </expect>
 		<var> 13.245750 </var>
 	</entry>

 </dump>

=head1 AUTHORS

The code and documentation were contributed by Stanford Linear Accelerator
Center, a department of Stanford University.
This documentation was written by

=over

=item Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net> and

=item Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu>

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER

 Copyright 2004 Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu> and
                Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net>
 All rights reserved.
