=head1 NAME

cfetool info - Get information about a database

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cfetool> B<info> I<name>
S<[B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>]>
S<[B<--daily>|B<-d>]>
S<[B<--weekly>|B<-w>]>
S<[B<--yearly>|B<-y>]>
S<[B<--verbose>|B<-v>]>
S<[B<--debug>|B<-D>]>
S<[B<--debugging>|B<-E>]>
S<[B<--debugging2>|B<-Y>]>
S<[B<--help>|B<-h>]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Prints out some basic information about the specified database, including:
the location of the database, the location of the histogram file (if there is
one), the step interval, the database age, the time it was last updated, and
the current overall average and variation.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>

The directory in which to find the database folder. If this argument is
not provided, the current working directory will be assumed.

=item B<--daily>|B<-d>

Provide information about the daily averages database. 

=item B<--weekly>|B<-w>

Provide information about the weekly averages database.

=item B<--yearly>|B<-y>

Provide information about the yearly averages database.

=item B<--verbose>|B<-v>

Print details of the command's execution to the standard output stream.

=item B<--debug>|B<-D>

Print even more details of the command's execution to the standard output
stream.

=item B<--debugging>|B<-E>

More debugging output.

=item B<--debugging2>|B<-Y>

Even more debugging output.

=item B<--help>|B<-h>

Prints a short help message and then exits.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

  % cfetool info temperature --path /my/path

 Weekly average database:
 Database Location: /my/path/temperature/weekly.db
 Histogram file: /my/path/temperature/weekly.hist
 Step: 10 minutes
 Database Age: 0.000992 weeks (1 steps)
 Last update: Mon Sep 13 16:20:40 2004 (1095117640)
 Current average: 7.105000, Var: 38.280217

=head1 AUTHORS

The code and documentation were contributed by Stanford Linear Accelerator
Center, a department of Stanford University.
This documentation was written by

=over

=item Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net> and

=item Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu>

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER

 Copyright 2004 Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu> and
                Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net>
 All rights reserved.
