=head1 NAME

cfetool create - Set up a new Database

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cfetool> B<create> I<name>
S<[B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>]>
S<[B<--step>|B<-s> I<step>]>
S<[B<--daily>|B<-d>]>
S<[B<--weekly>|B<-w>]>
S<[B<--yearly>|B<-y>]>
S<[B<--cfenvd>|B<-c>]>
S<[B<--histograms>|B<-H>]>
S<[B<--file>|B<-f> I<filename>]>
S<[B<--verbose>|B<-v>]>
S<[B<--debug>|B<-D>]>
S<[B<--help>|B<-h>]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Creates a new database and, optionally, histogram file in a new
directory with the name given. If the B<-p> option is specified, it will be
created as a subdirectory of the path given. Otherwise, it will be a 
subdirectory of the current working directory.

The B<-d>, B<-w>, and B<-y> options specify the period over which the data will
span, and may be combined to create multiple databases. If they are all ommitted,
the default is weekly.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--path>|B<-p>

The directory in which to create the new database folder. If this argument is
not provided, the current working directory will be used.

=item B<--step>|B<-s>

The interval, in minutes, with which the database will be updated.
If this argument is not provided, cfetool assumes a default of 5 minutes.

=item B<--daily>|B<-d>

Create a database for recording daily patterns.

=item B<--weekly>|B<-w>

Create a database for recording weekly patterns.

=item B<--yearly>|B<-y>

Create a database for recording yearly patterns.

=item B<--cfenvd>|B<-c>

Communicate with cfengine. If this option is specified, cfetool will set classes
understandable by cfagent. For more information, see the B<cfenvd> documentation.

=item B<--histograms>|B<-H>

Create a histogram file, to store information about the probability
distribiution of fluctuations about the mean value over all times of day.
Cfetool won't write anything to this file for the first four weeks, as it
has to have reliable mean values in order to accurately calculate it.

=item B<--verbose>|B<-v>

Print details of the command's execution to the standard output stream.

=item B<--debug>|B<-D>

Print even more details of the command's execution to the standard output
stream.

=item B<--file>|B<-f>

Specifies a file which contains measurements to feed into the database in
batch mode. Used for testing purposes. Each line in the file should be in
either of these formats:

I<month>/I<day>/I<year> I<hour>:I<min>:I<sec> I<value>

or

I<epoch> I<value>

=item B<--help>|B<-h>

Prints a short help message and then exits.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

  % cfetool create temperature --path /my/path --histograms --step 10

Creates an empty database and histogram file in B</my/path/temperature/>,
ready to store values over ten minute intervals spanning a one-week period.

=head1 AUTHORS

The code and documentation were contributed by Stanford Linear Accelerator
Center, a department of Stanford University.
This documentation was written by

=over

=item Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net> and

=item Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu>

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER

 Copyright 2004 Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu> and
                Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net>
 All rights reserved.
