=head1 NAME

cfetool check - Check a new value against the averages currently in the database

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cfetool> B<check> I<name>
S<B<--value>|B<-V> I<value>>
S<[B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>]>
S<[B<--time>|B<-t> I<seconds>]>
S<[B<--daily>|B<-d>]>
S<[B<--weekly>|B<-w>]>
S<[B<--yearly>|B<-y>]>
S<[B<--histograms>|B<-H>]>
S<[B<--verbose>|B<-v>]>
S<[B<--debug>|B<-D>]>
S<[B<--debugging>|B<-E>]>
S<[B<--debugging2>|B<-Y>]>
S<[B<--help>|B<-h>]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Takes a new value and checks it against the averages currently in the database
specified by I<name>, located at the path specified by the B<-p> argument,
or the current working directory if the B<-p> argument is ommitted. 
The value will be associated with the current time, unless the B<-t> option is
given. The output indicates how much higher or lower the new value is compared
to the averages in the database, in terms of the number of standard deviations.

The B<-d>, B<-w> and B<-y> options specify the databases to check the new value
against. If all three options are omitted, only the weekly database will be
accessed. 

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--value>|B<-v> I<value>

Specifies the new value for I<name> to check against the database averages.

=item B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>

The directory in which the database specified by I<name> can be found.

=item B<--time>|B<-t>

The time the value was collected, in seconds since epoch (January 1st, 1970).
If this argument is omitted, the current time will be used.

=item B<--daily>|B<-d>

Check the new value against the daily averages database. 

=item B<--weekly>|B<-w>

Check the new value against the weekly averages database.

=item B<--yearly>|B<-y>

Check the new value against the yearly averages database.

=item B<--histograms>|B<-H>

Check which histogram bucket the new value would fall into.
The histogram is divided into 64 buckets, which represent distances
from the mean value. Bucket 64 represents two standard deviations above
the expected value, and bucket 0 represents two standard deviations below the
expected value.

=item B<--verbose>|B<-v>

Print details of the command's execution to the standard output stream.

=item B<--debug>|B<-D>

Print even more details of the command's execution to the standard output
stream.

=item B<--debugging>|B<-E>

More debugging output.

=item B<--debugging2>|B<-Y>

Even more debugging output.

=item B<--help>|B<-h>

Print a short help message and then exit.

=back

=head1 OUTPUT

Before exiting, C<cfetool check> will print one line to the standard output
stream, in the following format:

yrly=I<ynum>,bkt=I<ybkt>;wkly=I<wnum>,bkt=I<wbkt>;dly=I<dnum>,bkt=I<dbkt>

I<ybkt>, I<wbkt> and I<dbkt> represent the histogram bucket the given value
falls into, and will be 0 for databases that are not being checked against,
and if there is no histogram file or the B<-H> option was not specified.

I<ynum>, I<wnum> and I<dnum> will be either the number 0 if the corresponding
database was not updated, or a code indicating the state of the given statistic,
as compared to an average of equivalent earlier times, as specified below:

 code    high|low|normal   meaning
 -------------------------------------------------------------
  -2     -                 no sigma variation
 -------------------------------------------------------------
  -4     low               within noise threshold, and within
  -5     normal              2 standard deviations from
  -6     high                expected value
 -------------------------------------------------------------
 -14     low               microanomaly: within noise
 -15     normal              threshold, but 2 or more standard
 -16     high                deviations from expected value
 -------------------------------------------------------------
 -24     low               normal; within 1 standard deviation
 -25     normal              from the expected value
 -26     high                
 -------------------------------------------------------------
 -34     low               dev1; more than 1 standard 
 -35     normal              deviation from the expected
 -36     high                value
 ------------------------------------------------------------
 -44     low               dev2; more than 2 standard
 -45     normal              deviations from the expected
 -46     high                value
 -------------------------------------------------------------
 -54     low               anomaly; more than 3 standard
 -55     normal              deviations from the expected
 -56     high                value

Where "low" indicates that the current value is below both the expected value
for the current time position, and the global average value. "high" indicates
that the current value is above those values. "normal" indicates that the
current value is within the range of expected values.

C<cfetool check> also exits with a code corresponding to the above table. If
more than one database is being checked against, the most negative result from 
all checks is returned, and the individual results must be obtained from the
standard output stream, as described above.

=head1 EXAMPLE

  % cfetool check temperature --path /my/path --value 20 --histograms
  yrly=0,bkt=0;wkly=-6,bkt=51;dly=0,bkt=0

Checks the value 20 against the weekly temperature database and histogram files
located in B</my/path/> using the current time. The output indicates
that the new value given was within cfetool's noise threshold, and also within
2 standard deviations of the previous average stored in the weekly database.

=head1 AUTHORS

The code and documentation were contributed by Stanford Linear Accelerator
Center, a department of Stanford University.
This documentation was written by

=over

=item Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net> and

=item Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu>

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER

 Copyright 2004 Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu> and
                Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net>
 All rights reserved.
