=head1 NAME

cfetoolgraph - create graphs from a cfetool database

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cfetoolgraph> I<name>
S<[B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>]>
S<[B<--daily>|B<-d>]>
S<[B<--weekly>|B<-w>]>
S<[B<--yearly>|B<-y>]>
S<[B<--timestamps>|B<-T>]>
S<[B<--resolution>|B<-r>]>
S<[B<--help>|B<-h>]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The cfetoolgraph command dumps graphs of averages for visual inspection of the
normal state database. The files are in a format viewable by C<gnuplot> or
C<xgmr> or other graphical plotting program.

The command generates three or four files in a subdirectory of the database
directory with a name beginning with either C<daily>, C<weekly> or C<yearly>,
then C<->, then either C<snapshot> or the current time, if the B<-T> option is
used.  The files are named C<average>, C<stddev>, and C<graph>. The C<graph>
file contains both the averages and standard deviations, useful for plotting
with error bars.

If a histogram file is present, a fourth file named C<distr> will also be
created, plotting the distribution of fluctuations about the mean value.

If the B<-d>, B<-w> and B<-y> options are all omitted, the default is to only
graph the weekly database.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--path>|B<-p> I<directory name>

The directory in which the database specified by I<name> can be found.

=item B<--daily>|B<-d>

Graph the daily averages database. 

=item B<--weekly>|B<-w>

Graph the weekly averages database.

=item B<--yearly>|B<-y>

Graph the yearly averages database.

=item B<--timestamps>|B<-T>

Time-stamp the output filenames with the current time, in order to give a
unique name.

=item B<--resolution>|B<-r>

Generate high resolution data (), instead of averaging data
over periods of one hour to generate simpler and smoother graphs.

=item B<--help>|B<-h>

Prints a short help message and then exits.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

  % cfetoolgraph temperature --path /my/path --resolution

Create graph files of the weekly database in high resolution in the
C</my/path/temperature/weekly-snapshot> directory.

=head1 AUTHORS

The code and documentation were contributed by Stanford Linear Accelerator
Center, a department of Stanford University.
This documentation was written by

=over

=item Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net> and

=item Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu>

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER

 Copyright 2004 Alf Wachsmann <alfw@slac.stanford.edu> and
                Elizabeth Cassell <e_a_c@mailsnare.net>
 All rights reserved.
