.TH cfengine 8 "Maintenance Commands"
.SH NAME
cfrun \- Execute remote cfagents
.SH SYNOPSIS

/usr/local/sbin/cfrun [options] 

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cfengine
is a language based system specifically designed
for testing and configuring unix\-like systems attached to
a TCP/IP network. 

.PP
cfrun is a tool for executing one or more remote agents; it
contacts the cfservd daemon running on a remote host, which (in turn)
starts an authorized agent. Cfrun cannot be used to send instructions
to a remote agent, but it can be used to flag certain aspects
to the agent's existing policy for special attention.. 

.PP
The command line options for cfrun are slightly unusual. They are
separated into three sections: options to the cfrun program, options
to the remote cfagent (with some security restrictions) and finally
classes or flags to the remote agent.

.SH EXAMPLES

cfrun specialhost1 specialhost2 -- --verbose -- \!solaris

.PP
In this example, we contact hosts specialhost1 specialhost2 by name, and ask them
to execute cfagent with the --verbose flag, if the class solaris is not
defined.
.PP
.PP
cfrun specialhost1 --verbose  --  -- \!solaris

.PP
In this example the verbose flag is sent to cfrun rather than to the remote agent.
No options are sent to the remote agents. The class specifier is sent to
all the agents so that they may determine whether they fulfill the
required class membership for execution.
.PP
The default behaviour is to execute cfagent serially on all hosts listed
in the cfrun.hosts file.

.SH FILES
cfrun read a configuration file cfrun.hosts which must contain a list of every potentially
contactable host.

.SH AUTHOR
Mark Burgess, Oslo University College
.SH INFORMATION
http://www.cfengine.org

